[music]
>> From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
In the midst of a cascade [music]
of violent acts against political
figures, it happened in Minnesota, the
murder of a state representative and her
husband in what's being called a
politically motivated attack.
>> a man is charged in connection with an
arson [music] at the Pennsylvania
governor's residence while Governor
Shapiro and his family slept inside.
[music]
Charlie Kirk has been shot.
>> The latest from the White House
Correspondents Dinner, the Secret
Service has a person in custody after
[music] shots were fired and in the wake
of what appears to be the third
assassination attempt against President
Trump.
>> Times reports the suspected shooter's
1,000-word manifesto says [music] Trump
administration figures were his targets.
The question that keeps coming up is how
do we get here?
>> [music]
>> And how much worse could it really get?
So last week, I called University of
Chicago Professor Robert Pape.
For decades, he's been one of the
country's leading experts [music] on
political violence, and he's advised
every White House from 2001 to 2024.
We talked about why violence from the
right and the left is on the rise and
what it would take [music]
to stop it.
It's Monday, May 4th.
Professor Pape, we started thinking
about doing a conversation like this
after a series of what felt like
extraordinary instances of political
violence. The president's two
assassination attempts and then Charlie
Kirk's assassination. So, we at The
Daily have been talking to you in the
background for some time now. And then
there was another act of violence
apparently directed at the Trump
administration. And so, we thought now
is the time. So, thanks for being here.
Thank you very much for having me. I
want to start with this theory that you
have, which is that we are in an age of
what you call violent populism. This is
something you have a book coming out on
and you say that this violent populism
represents a bigger risk to American
democracy than anything else. No
terrorist group or foreign country comes
close in your eyes.
So, first of all, what is violent
populism and why is it such a risk?
The most important fact about political
violence in America today is this.
Tens of millions of Americans on both
sides of the aisle see political
violence as acceptable.
And once you have tens of millions of
Americans, not a fringe, not a few
militia groups, who see violence as
acceptable, this changes everything
about the risks of attack. It makes the
individuals who are volatile for their
own psychosocial reasons, it pushes
those volatile individuals over the edge
because what they see is the prospect of
social approval for their acts. And when
you have tens of millions of Americans
who support political violence, it makes
tips to the FBI very, very difficult to
get because the more support there is
for political violence, the more people
will simply look the other way. They'll
discount what they see. And this is what
I mean by the era of violent populism,
which is once we have tens of millions
of Americans supporting political
violence for their own causes, this can
then create spirals. Mhm. You can see it
on the debate, is this a mostly
right-wing phenomenon or a left-wing
phenomenon? Well, we have all the cases
here and the cases are, let me just go
over the last 12 months. So, we saw in
June 2025
the assassination murder of a Democratic
leader in Minnesota. You saw the
assassination murder of Charlie Kirk a
few months later. Then in January, you
saw the killing by ICE agents of two
American citizens. We also have Governor
Shapiro in Pennsylvania. We of course
have multiple President Trump
assassination attempts. So, what you are
seeing is clearly the rise of political
violence on both sides, but the really
important thing to say about this is not
just that it's rising on both sides, but
it's now starting to spiral. If I
understand what you're saying, it's not
just the violent people who are
implicated in this, it's the broader
social acceptance that they are finding
in a significant portion of American
society. So, it's not just them, it's
many of the rest of us. In a way, this
acceptance you're saying fuels the
violence itself. That's exactly right.
And we have conducted 20 nationally
representative surveys of Americans over
the last 5 years. We conduct them at the
University of Chicago Project on
Security and Threats and we started
doing it in the summer of 2021
and then uh the most recent one was in
the end of January of this year. So, we
understand quite a bit about the
attitudes of Americans on political
violence. And just to say very clearly
what that data shows, the social
acceptance of political violence is up
by how much exactly? Lay out what we
know. So, for most of the years of the
Biden administration, so this would be
from say 2021 to the end of the Biden
administration, our surveys found 10% of
the body politics supported political
violence to restore Donald Trump to the
presidency. And then we did focus groups
and we did further survey research, what
do people think they mean by the use of
force? And what we found is 55% of the
people who say the use of force is
justified think that use of force means
assassination. Oh, wow. So, half of that
10% at that point of the body politic
endorsed assassination, which is
honestly surprising to me. What is that
percentage now? It's roughly double,
it's now between 14 and 21%.
>> Wow. So, what you saw is almost
immediately after the election of
President Trump is that doubled and it
has stayed that high. It has not gone
down. Another example of this is we
asked a key question in uh September
2025,
do you find it acceptable that Charlie
Kirk was assassinated? Do you find it
acceptable that Nancy Pelosi had the
attempted assassination? And what was
the result? It was 10% for each. 10% for
each, which means 20 million American
adults
found that acceptable on each side.
Overall, what you're saying is roughly
one in five people in America support
some kind of political violence now,
which is a lot and it's increasing on
both sides of the spectrum. Professor
Pape, how does this moment in political
violence stack up against other periods
where we saw this kind of violence in
spades? I'm thinking of the '60s and
'70s, for example.
We have had other periods of violent
populism in America. I call this the
period of violent populism cuz it's not
civil war where we don't have organized
armies going at each other. That's not
the era we're living in. And it's also
not the era of just nasty politics as
usual, which we've had in our country
for decades and decades. This era of
violent populism can be documented
starting about 10 years ago and we've
had previous eras of violent populism
that look quite similar to this. Mhm. In
the 1920s after World War I, you saw the
rise of the second Ku Klux Klan, which
had been dormant for decades, grew from
a few hundred thousand to four to six
million
members. And those members paid dues. We
have records, we know that this was not
just simply in the South. This was in
many places in the North. And what you
saw was again millions of Americans
supporting political violence. Mhm. The
1960s is another example. And in the
1960s, you have a string of political
assassinations. You also have collective
political violence. You have political
riots happening in a number of cities,
that's the Chicago convention in 1968.
>> Right. And we have opinion poll data
from the '60s and similar to today,
there is really a striking
correspondence of support by tens of
millions of Americans for that political
violence itself. So, what's different
about our era today is not just that
this is not the first time we've had
millions of Americans supporting
political violence. It is pretty much
the first time it's happened on both
sides at the same time.
>> Okay. That's another distinctive feature
about what's occurring in our current
period compared to the '60s, which was
mostly from the left, and the early
'20s, which was mostly from the right.
Okay, can you characterize the rise in
political violence that we've seen
recently? Like with numbers. How do we
measure that? What do we know about the
extent of it?
We have a variety of databases, we have
the FBI databases. And then we did a
study at SIPOS, the University of
Chicago Project on Security and Threats,
of threats to members of Congress over a
25-year period from 2001 to 2024.
And this was important because these
were threats who were prosecuted by the
Department of Justice. We found that
starting in the first year of Trump's
presidency in 2017,
a fivefold increase
in threats to members of Congress.
And we found that increase happened to
Democratic targets and Republican
targets. And once you kind of peel down
and get inside some of their motives,
you see that Trump's rise was a
lightning rod on both sides.
>> Mhm. There are members of Congress
targeted because they support Trump's
agenda too much, say Marjorie Taylor
Greene. There are members of Congress
who are targeted because they're not
supporting President Trump's agenda
enough. So you actually end up with a
dramatic spike up and it stays up at
that level year after year after year,
about an 8-year period during the first
Trump presidency and the Biden
presidency. So you might think it would
just diminish because we've had a change
of president. No, and that is indicative
of there's more going on than just
simply a person, President Trump. Right,
and I want to get to that because it
does seem as though this period of time
that you're zeroing in on was a catalyst
for a rise in political violence, but
interestingly, not a catalyst just
exclusively for one side or the other,
but for both. So I want to understand
that question of why. Generally
speaking, why does this kind of violence
ramp up? What we are seeing at bottom is
not simply the impact of an individual,
a president, although President Trump is
contributing. Not simply the impact of
social media, although social media is
contributing. We're seeing the impact of
social change.
And social change, major social change,
when it happens in a country, is a cause
of the radicalization of politics, which
can cause political violence. Now, what
is the major social change happening in
the United States today?
>> exactly. There are actually two. The
first and most dominant social change is
for the first time in our country's
250-year history, we are transitioning
from a white majority democracy to a
white minority democracy.
That has never happened in our country's
250-year history. In, say, 1960, about
88% of Americans were non-Hispanic
whites. Today, that is 57% of Americans.
>> A big change. In about 20 years, it'll
be 49%.
And what has been one of the big reasons
for this is, of course, immigration. So
no surprise that as we are now in what I
call the tipping point generation for
transitioning from the white majority to
the white minority democracy, the
20-year period where that's going to
happen, immigration is probably the
number one lightning rod issue in
America today. And that's true on both
the right and the left. And let me just
explain on the right. When you have this
major social change, you're going to
see, essentially, the established group
wanting to stop or reverse that change.
Because as that change happens, they
will lose political power. That will
mean declining economic prospects. That
will have lots of impact going forward
for generations. Now, on the other side,
lots of the new group very much wants to
keep this change going. They're in fact
going to benefit from this change and
they want, if anything, not to stop it,
but to accelerate it. So you have the
lightning rod issue of demographic
change directly fueling the support for
political violence and you see this in
our surveys. Right. Basically, this huge
upheaval on this level
of demographic change that we're seeing,
it scrambles things on all sides. It's
just too big of a shift to not have an
impact. What's the secondary big change
that you were saying matters? Side by
side with the demographic shift is a
shift of wealth to the top 1%, which
starts in the mid-1980s.
It doesn't matter which party is in
power, wealth is being shifted from the
bottom 90%
to the top 1%. So if you're in the 91st
to 99th percent, you don't see much of a
change. But if you're in the top 1%, you
are gaining enormous wealth from the
country and it's coming out of the
entire bottom 90%
pretty much evenly at the different
quintiles. And so what that means is, as
political power is changing with the
changing demographics, both the
Republican side and the Democratic side,
cuz they're the bottom 90%,
they really see their economic prospects
could be clobbered even more.
>> Mhm. And part [clears throat] of the big
reason for this is nobody's solving
the shift of wealth to the top 1%.
Neither party has taken that on and that
is an additional fuel to the bipartisan
nature of the rise of political
violence. What you're really talking
about is a shift in power and influence
for certain people. And And for many
people on a really large scale seeing
their future prospects change and a
sense that they're losing power. That's
exactly right, Natalie. And another way
to put it is, we often think of the
support for political violence among the
losers of society, those marginal people
that have little to lose, so they take a
fling at political violence somehow.
This is not the case in our surveys.
What you're seeing is large numbers of
educated people, large numbers of
middle-class people, large numbers of
upper-middle class on both sides are
supporting political violence because
they're the haves and they're worried
they're going to lose even more in the
future.
>> That's interesting. And this is
different.
>> You're saying basically that the people
who are committing some of these acts
are not necessarily the people who are
in the worst position, but the people
who might have the most to lose, who
could see their stature decline the
most, the fastest. That's right.
Here's what may seem like a naive
question, Professor. Why would those
people, the people who might live in a
suburb next to you, who have a lot to
lose, who might be educated, who have
means, why would they resort to
violence? Wouldn't they have all kinds
of other ways to influence things? Like
I think we think of violence as a last
resort for people who have no other
option. So why is this kind of a profile
looking and turning to means that you
might associate with someone who has
absolutely nothing left? The key fear
that we found was the fear of political
exclusion. Where as they became a
minority, they couldn't get their
grievances, they couldn't get their
interests through politics.
>> Mhm. And by the way, this is happening
on both sides. And you see that there is
real concern that with President Trump
as now the president, and he himself is
talking about seizing voting machines
now, what that is is creating the fear
of lockout among Democrats. Once you're
in the transitional 10-20-year period,
both sides can fear political lockout
and then they're going to fight even
harder because this means this may be
their last chance before it's
irreversible.
It does seem like this is a commentary
on the political system as it exists
right now and the reality that both
parties aren't making people feel like
change through politics is actually
possible, or at least a lot of people
feel that way. And that that fear for
certain people is existential. They feel
that they'll be, you said, locked out,
that there soon will be no other way for
them to be heard.
That's right. Again, I want to be
careful and not paint all Republicans in
this picture and all Democrats, but
again, it's tens of millions of
Republicans and tens of millions of
Democrats, so it's not a tiny number.
What you are seeing here is an
existential concern. They are treating
politics now not as a policy dispute,
not as a minor dispute here about
whether social security should be taxed
at, you know, 6%, 7%, 8%. We're way
beyond that and this is why it's not
just simply polarization.
What we are seeing is the rise of true
existential politics and what that is
doing is it's occurring on both sides
and it's because of this generational
period we're going through, this 20-year
tipping point, and this is really the
danger zone of violent populism. And we
are now coming up to [music]
a pivotal midterm election.
And this election, I believe, in the
midterms in November, will probably be
the most dangerous election in our
lifetime.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Okay, so I get that there's a lot of
people in this country that don't like
what's happening. They feel profoundly
powerless. But obviously that feeling
doesn't automatically translate into
going out and killing people. The vast
majority of pissed off people do not go
out and commit acts of violence against
politicians and never would. So, how
does it get there? How do you go from
feeling powerless to getting to the
point where you would commit an act like
this? Well, we need to understand we've
left out that it does matter what our
leaders say.
When political leaders talk about
literally punching people out and Donald
Trump has famously done this.
And I'm not really trying to pick on
folks, but if you will just go back to
last August and see some of the videos
of Beto O'Rourke.
And Gavin Newsom
It's not quite exactly the same as
Donald Trump, but you'll see that as
they're trying to demonstrate to their
constituencies, they will fight. They
are coming quite close to President
Trump's images of actually hitting
people. And this is very important
because our leaders really are authority
figures. And so if those authority
figures start to find a violent act
unacceptable, and and again, they may
not even fully understand that they're
doing that. Others are going to are
going to hear that and they're going to
move in that direction as well. Okay, I
want to dig deeper into that rhetoric
question and how that actually
translates.
You know, how do you get from rhetoric
to violence? It sounds like you're
saying there are certain people who can
be nudged into violence by the
environment and the words, the messages
that they're receiving.
Now, I want to be very careful here.
Don't think of these as iron laws. Think
of these as risk factors and the
tendencies in the data. But what you see
is that there are individuals, and you
can actually see them in the survey
research, who are predisposed to be
angry and predisposed to act out
impulsively. And then it is
disproportionately that portion of those
folks who are already angry, already
impulsive, who are far more likely to be
activated. You're focusing here on
top-down
rhetoric as something that can cause,
can push an already predisposed person
toward violence. Isn't there also a kind
of bottom-up rhetoric that plays a role
here? I mean, you've heard about these
attackers living in these online
communities where some of these acts are
cheered on. You don't even have to go
that deep on the internet to see some of
this stuff. after the United Healthcare
CEO, for example, was killed, people
were openly celebrating and lionizing
the shooter on X. So, I'm wondering what
you make of that, what role that
bottom-up language and discussion has in
all this. So, social media is making
things worse. It's adding gasoline to a
fire, but it's not the fire itself. But
it is important because what you see is
social media is the immediate
manifestation of those tens of millions
of Americans who are supporting
political violence because many of them
are on social media and you can then see
in the different ways they react. And a
good example of how this works it can
interact with a top-down. So, just pick
the Pelosi attack as just one to give
you the example. So, with the Pelosi
attack, shortly thereafter, Donald Trump
Jr. made fun of the attack. It was near
Halloween and so he made a social media
post about how he was going to have the
costume here and it was basically the
hammer and so forth that the attacker
used on Paul Pelosi. And that generated
enormous social media support, lots of
laughter. And what you saw is an
interaction effect here. And so then
future would be attackers can see that
and that is how you end up with this
confidence and social approval. Now,
just also to be clear, in the 1960s, we
didn't have any social media and we had
plenty of political violence and tens of
millions of people supporting it. In the
1920s, we didn't have social media and
we barely had radio and television. And
nonetheless, we got enormous support for
political violence. So, I don't want to
overread this as if it's everything is
just about the internet. We tend to
dodge the actual core issues of the
social change and then we tend to focus
on things that we are just a little more
comfortable, I guess I would say, to
focus on as if if we simply solve that
one problem, everything would be okay.
No, you're pointing to the accelerants,
but they are not the absolute fire
itself. You talked about a relatively
small group of volatile people who
commit this kind of violence. I guess
I'm curious if you think this broad
support for political violence means
that that pool of volatile people may be
growing. Like, are more of us vulnerable
to violence than before? Is there a
vicious cycle thing happening here?
I do believe that's true. It's a little
more difficult to document with great
precision, but I do believe that we see
that as the pool of supporters for
political violence grows, the
individuals who are the volatile
individuals are coming from that pool as
well. And what you are seeing is a wider
range of biographical backgrounds and
that matches then the wider range of
supporters of political violence in
general in the body politic. Where we
really drilled into this was we analyzed
the early profile of the January 6th
attackers, those who broke into the
Capitol, compared to who committed
political violence on the right from FBI
data going back the previous several
decades. And what we found is a markedly
different profile. What we found is that
the old profile of those who would
commit lethal right-wing violence was
people who were unemployed, members of
militia groups. They were basically the
fringe. And what we found was in the
first hundreds of people who were
arrested after January 6th, that profile
looked nothing like that. The profile
was very different. They were unemployed
only to the average of the country as a
whole, 7%. They were business owners,
doctors, lawyers, CEOs. That's the
profile. As think of it as
insurrectionists in a business suit
living in a nice suburb right next to
you. And only about 10% were members of
militia groups, not 50% as we had found
before. So, what we saw was a completely
different profile. And the more we added
to the database, the more it went from a
few hundred to 1,575,
the more the profile stayed the same. It
did not shift as more people were
arrested. And it's important to
understand because otherwise you're
going to look for the shooters in the
wrong place. So, this is why it's so
important to get the profiles right.
>> Yeah, you're pointing to what's been a
persistent misunderstanding of who these
violent people actually are now. And the
idea that we have trouble seeing that
this profile has actually changed. I
wonder how you explain that change. Why
has it changed? Here's how I explain it,
Natalie. We like our monsters to be
villains that are far away from us. It's
comforting to think
that the monsters among us who might
actually commit these awful acts of
political assassination and murder, we
like to imagine they're not very close
to us. They're far away. They're
distant. Human beings want comfort. They
want the idea that what happened today
will never happen again and will surely
never happen to them. It's just very far
away from them. And so that's why these
false narratives of who the profile is,
they emerge and they're popular because
they want to have that assurance. And so
that's really the the taproot of this.
It [snorts] sounds like at the heart of
what you're saying is we shouldn't be
surprised that political violence is up
on all sides of the political spectrum
and from a different kind of profile of
an attacker just given the environment,
the rhetoric from both the top and from
the bottom. So, what do you think is the
best way of reaching these people who
might commit violent acts or changing
their calculus? Are you saying the best
way of dealing with this is that as a
culture and political leaders in
particular, we just need to tone down
the rhetoric. Uh no, I'm saying that we
need to address this in two stages, and
that is in the longer term, after the
midterms, we need to really address
these social changes. We don't want to
stop the social change of demographic
change occurring in the country, but it
would be a wise thing to slow it down so
our political institutions can catch up.
And that would mean, just to be very
clear, that would mean essentially
adopting Obama-era immigration policies.
The second thing is, I think we should
be reducing the wealth shift, and not
just stopping it, and not just certainly
not continuing it, to the top 1%. And
that's just not happening by either
party. Both parties are essentially
giving money to their donors, and that's
just going on and on, and it's not
changing, and we need to be upfront
about that. Now, those are longer-term
changes, though. Between now and the
midterms, you're not changing either of
those two policies. So, what do we do
between now and the midterms? The only
policies we really have at our disposal
over the next few months are changes
here with our leaders. Our leaders are
the only real source we have to diminish
the spirals of violence that are now
occurring. I think it would be a very
good idea to do something radical, and
this would be Hakeem Jeffries, the
Democratic leader in the House, to reach
out to Donald Trump and say, "Could
there be a joint video statement by the
two leaders condemning political
violence on all sides?" Can I just push
and ask if that really works, like if
it's worked in the past? Because, I
mean, if Hakeem Jeffries and Mike
Johnson come out and say, "Look, this is
bad on all sides," I just wonder if that
would really change the calculus for an
very online person who is, you know,
watching the outpouring of support for a
shooter who kills the CEO of United
Healthcare. I mean, if you feel like the
elected leaders in this country don't
address your concerns or really care
what you say,
does it matter the message they give
you?
The best evidence that we have that this
rhetoric that I'm giving will matter is
in the summer of 2024 with the first
Trump assassination attempt. The next
day, Joe Biden gave a speech from the
Oval Office on a Sunday with exactly
these lines in it, this rhetoric that
I'm explaining. And then, as we tracked
our surveys, the support for political
violence, the next time we did the
survey a couple months later, actually
did come down 20% across the board in
the country. Then, in September, you'll
remember there was the second attempt on
President Trump at the golf course, and
again, we saw the rhetoric by President
Biden, this time joined by candidate
Kamala Harris, the very same rhetoric of
bringing it down across all sides. And
then, what we saw is it went down again
a few months later. I can't say it was
the only cause, but it was the effective
thing to do. It certainly didn't make
anything worse. Given that the political
leaders in this country, at this moment,
are not actually solving the structural
issues that you've pointed to as drivers
of this violence,
I wonder if, when you think of these
people who are committing these acts, it
seems as though they feel they have no
recourse at this moment, that these
issues, they're existential, some of
them, and that this is the only thing
they have left to do.
And I wonder how we should interpret
that impulse right now, given everything
you've told us.
The big message for the country is to
understand that even with all these
structural determinants, even with all
these pressures,
the future of political violence is a
choice.
We can choose to ignore all these
structural pressures,
or we can choose to understand them and
then to move forward. And what would it
mean to move forward? Well, we've been
focusing on the tens of millions on one
side or the other who support political
violence, but we need to understand
there are 75%
of the population in the United States
that abhors political violence.
And that comes in every one of our
surveys. Right. 75%.
They need to exert some agency.
They need to complain about political
violence. They need to send letters to
their senators, their congressmen, their
mayors, the president of the United
States. They need to send letters to
say, "It is high time that we have
Democratic and Republican leaders
jointly condemning political violence."
That is a voice that's not been heard.
So, for the last period of this
interview, we've focused on so much of
the problem, but there is a core anchor
that we need to lean into, that we're
simply not leaning into.
We can have a better future. It is a
choice. But it's a choice that we, the
people, have to make, and it's we, the
75%,
have to make, because that is the
country, and that is our future.
Right, I think people may think the only
way to participate in public discourse
is to be firmly on one side or the
other. And what you're saying is a
version of participation is to just go
out and assert that you oppose violence
for any reason, and that that is the
majority of Americans. That is exactly
right. Leaders listen to their
constituents.
So, if all they're getting
is emails from their constituents go hit
the other side harder and harder, that's
literally all that's in their inbox,
no surprise that's what they say.
>> [music]
>> But if they hear from their
constituents, and I'm saying 75% of the
constituents of Republicans, of
Democrats, they abhor political
violence.
Those constituents need to step up to
the moment as well.
>> [music]
>> They need to make a choice. Is it worth
it to take the time to send those emails
and make those phone calls to their
representatives,
because that actually is what gets the
representatives to move.
>> [music]
>> Well, Professor Pape, thank you so much
for coming on the show. We really
appreciate it. Thank you very much for
having me.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Sunday, President Trump said that the
US would launch a new effort to help
guide [music] stranded ships through the
Strait of Hormuz, in what was
essentially a direct challenge [music]
to Iran.
The president didn't offer any details
about how exactly that initiative would
work, but he said any interference in it
would be dealt [music] with forcefully.
The announcement came after the
president suggested that he would likely
reject Iran's latest proposal in the
negotiations aimed at ending the war,
which are at an impasse. [music]
Earlier in the weekend, Trump told
reporters that military strikes on Iran
could possibly resume, and a senior
Iranian general said there could be
renewed [music] confrontation between
the two countries.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Astha
Chaturvedi, Jack D'Isidoro, Nina
Feldman, [music] and Rochelle Banja,
with help from Carlos Prieto and Shannon
Lin.
It was edited by M.J. [music] Davis Lin
and Paige Cowett, with help from Brendan
Klinkenberg. Research help by Susan Lee,
and contains music by Dan Powell, Rowan
[music] Nemirow, and Marion Lozano.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily. [music]
I'm Natalie Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.